Add Trace2Metrics content to Generate Metrics doc (#32456)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/trace_pipeline/generate_metrics.md

Span-based metrics are created from spans that have been ingested by Datadog APM, regardless of whether those spans are indexed by a [retention filter][1]. These metrics allow you to extract numeric values (such as counts, durations, or custom tags) from spans or traces and store them as long-lived [custom metrics][3] with a 15-month retention period.

**Note:** The set of spans available for metric generation depends on your [APM ingestion control settings][12]. Spans dropped due to sampling or filtering are not ingested, and therefore cannot be used to generate metrics. If you're looking for metrics based on 100% of your application traffic you can use [Trace Metrics][13].

Use **custom metrics from spans** when you:
- Need fine-grained visibility into **span-level** latency, error rates, or tag-level performance
- Want to power [anomaly][4] or [forecast][7] monitors with low-latency, high-resolution metrics
- Don't need to retain the span, but want to extract key signals for trending or alerting

Use **custom metrics from traces** when you:
- Need metrics derived from **complete trace context**, such as total trace duration or span diversity

> - Want to alert on conditions that require full trace knowledge (e.g., N+1 detection, fan-out patterns)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Want to alert on conditions that require full trace knowledge (e.g., N+1 query detection, fan-out patterns)
```

---
title: Generate Custom Metrics from Spans and Traces
description: 'Generate custom metrics from ingested spans and complete traces.'
aliases:
- /tracing/span_to_metrics/
- /tracing/trace_to_metrics/
- /tracing/generate_metrics/
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/trace_pipeline'
      tag: "Documentation"
      text: 'Customize trace ingestion and retain important traces'
    - link: 'tracing/trace_search_and_analytics/query_syntax'
      tag: "Documentation"
      text: 'Use Analytics queries and monitors based on retained traces'
    - link: 'tracing/trace_explorer/trace_queries'
      tag: "Documentation"
      text: 'Use advanced trace queries to create metrics from specific traces'
    - link: 'tracing/metrics/metrics_namespace'
      tag: "Documentation"
      text: 'Monitor 100% of your application traffic with trace metrics'
    - link: 'https://registry.terraform.io/providers/DataDog/datadog/latest/docs/resources/spans_metric'
      tag: "External Site"
      text: 'Create and manage span-based metrics with Terraform'
---

> {{< callout url="https://help.datadoghq.com/hc/en-us/requests/new" header="Request access to the Preview!" >}}

Reviewer 2: Usually we point users to our Product Preview site. Have you considered adding a page here we can link to instead?

https://www.datadoghq.com/product-preview/

> Custom Metrics from Traces are in Preview. To request access, send a ticket to the support of APM and provide a short description of your use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom metrics from traces are in Preview. To request access, submit a ticket to the APM Support team and provide a short description of your use case.
```

{{< /callout >}}

{{< img src="tracing/apm_lifecycle/span_based_metrics.png" style="width:100%; background:none; border:none; box-shadow:none;" alt="Span-based metrics" >}}

> Generate custom metrics from ingested spans to track trends, power dashboards, and trigger monitors—even for spans and traces that are not retained for full trace analysis.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Generate custom metrics from your APM data to track trends, power dashboards, and trigger monitors. You can create metrics from two sources:

- **Spans**: Create metrics from individual ingested spans.
- **Traces**: Create metrics from complete, end-to-end traces.
```

> Span-based metrics are created from spans that have been ingested by Datadog APM, regardless of whether those spans are indexed by a [retention filter][1]. These metrics allow you to extract numeric values from spans (such as counts, durations, or custom tags) or traces (end-to-end trace duration) and store them as long-lived [custom metrics][3] with a 15-month retention period.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Custom metrics are created from spans ingested by Datadog APM, regardless of whether a [retention filter][1] indexes those spans. Extract numeric values from spans (such as counts, durations, or custom tags) or traces (end-to-end trace duration) and store them as long-lived [custom metrics][3] with 15-month retention.
```

**Notes:**
- Datadog automatically generates an out-of-the-box set of [Trace Metrics][13] capturing request, error rates and latency distributions based on 100% of your application traffic.

> - The set of spans available for custom metric generation depends on your [APM ingestion control settings][12]. Spans dropped due to sampling or filtering are not ingested, and therefore cannot be used to generate metrics.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Datadog automatically generates [Trace Metrics][13] that capture request counts, error rates, and latency distributions for 100% of your application traffic.
- Available spans for custom metric generation depend on your [APM ingestion control settings][12]. Dropped spans from sampling or filtering cannot generate metrics.
```

Use **custom metrics from spans** when you:
- Need fine-grained visibility into **span-level** latency, error rates, or tag-level performance
- Want to power [anomaly][4] or [forecast][7] monitors with low-latency, high-resolution metrics
- Don't need to retain the span, but want to extract key signals for trending or alerting

Use **custom metrics from traces** when you:
- Need metrics derived from **complete trace context**, such as total trace duration or the number of operations per trace.

> - Want to alert on conditions that require full trace knowledge (e.g., N+1 query detection, fan-out patterns)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### When to use custom metrics from spans

Use custom metrics from spans for:
- Fine-grained visibility into span-level latency, error rates, or tag-level performance
- Powering [anomaly][4] or [forecast][7] monitors with low-latency, high-resolution metrics.
- Extracting key signals for trending or alerting without retaining the full span.

### When to use custom metrics from traces

Use custom metrics from traces for:
- Metrics derived from complete trace context, such as total trace duration or operations per trace.
- Alerting on conditions requiring full trace knowledge (for example, N+1 query detection or fan-out patterns).
- Extracting key signals for trending or alerting without retaining the full trace.

> <div class="alert alert-danger">Span-based metrics are considered <a href="/metrics/custom_metrics/">custom metrics</a> and are billed accordingly. To avoid high costs, do not group metrics by high-cardinality values such as user IDs or request IDs.</div>

Reviewer 2: We need this warning for span and trace-based metrics, right?
```suggestion
<div class="alert alert-danger">Custom metrics from spans and traces are <a href="/metrics/custom_metrics/">custom metrics</a> and billed accordingly. Avoid grouping by high-cardinality values (such as user IDs, request IDs, or timestamps) to prevent billing impact.</div>

```

{{< img src="tracing/span_to_metrics/editspantometrics.png" style="width:100%;" alt="Edit an existing metrics" >}}

After a metric is created, only two fields can be updated:

| Field                                  | Reason                                                                                                                  |
|----------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Stream filter query                    | Change the set of matching spans to be aggregated into metrics.                                                         |
| Aggregation groups                     | Update the tags to manage the cardinality of generated metrics.                                                         |

**Note**: To change the metric type or name, create a new metric and delete the old one.

## Data availability

Metrics generated from traces are emitted once a trace is considered complete. 
For long-running traces, the delay increases accordingly (for example, the metric associated to a 45-minute cannot be emited before the trace completion).

> Monitors using custom metrics from traces should account for this latency to avoid false positive.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Metrics generated from traces are emitted after a trace completes. For long-running traces, the delay increases accordingly (for example, a 45-minute trace's metric cannot be emitted until trace completion).

When using custom metrics from traces in monitors, account for this latency to avoid false positives.
```
